BIOLOGY -- OMFG

 X --> won't ask in exam

*** BIO1130 - 2019 - Introduction - students PPTX

Example 1: Cheetah (mammal)
    Can go 110 km/h +
    - Forelegs (Pectoral Girdle (Scapula))
        Slides up and down on ribcage (vertebral column). Ribcage is on a sling of muscle that acts as a shock absorber.
    - Hindlegs (Pelvic Girdle (Pelvis))
        Attatched to the vertebral column (back of animal). Gives speed and propulsion.
    - Apperance of limbs came 440 MYR and came from the bottom two fins on a fish. There helped the fish with stabalization
        Fish are cloesly related to tetrapods. The pelvic girdle on the Cheetah fused to the vetebra column 385 MYR, which had evolved from the tetrapod.

.
Talking about the cheetah – some features found in the cheetah are found in the gazelle as well – coevolution --- cheetahacceleration 
22  Cheetah's elbow and knees ar eunder their body -- called erect posture 
    dinasuars are quick large -- 
23  looking at all carnivores -- they walk/run on their tips of their toes (digitigrade) -- so sole of the foot is part of the limb for faster speed
    carnivore's claws are very imp -- paw of cheetah is very thin and small -- so tip is quite light so they can run fast
    gazelle don't need to catch prey so they need rto run fast to escape -- so they elongate by adding the sole to their limb? unguligrade
    humans are plantigrade
24  all cats have retractable claws -- pulled back with their paws (hidden) -- among their carnivores only cats have this feature?
        -25 MYR (million years ago) 
25  cheetah have semi retractable claws -- so some of their ancesters had retractable claws 
    claws allow for more traction when running -- so speed -- cheetah uses speed to catch prey so thats why semi retractable claws
26  The limb of a cheetah is the result of ? years of evolution
27  adaptations of terrestrial tetrapods in cheetahs
    adaptations of mammals in cheetahs 
    adaptations of the order carnivores in the cheetahs
28  adaptations of the cheetah compared to other felines–Fur pigmentation
        –Long and thin limbs especially in the distal end (stride length)
        –lightweight, slender and muscular body (speed)
        –Flexibility of the spine (speed, stride length) -- among all the cats cheetah is more flexible
        –Wide nostrils, heart and lungs with high functionalal capacity
29  Thus, what is a cheetah?
        A cheetah is a mammal characterized by few derived traits (evolutionary innovations) that distinguishes it from other feline species.
            –The species is the result of 3500 MYR of evolution. Why?
            –More than 99% of its characteristics have evolved in species that are now extinct. 
            –Less than 1 % of its features are unique.So the cheetah is more the result of the history of ancesters than of its own history. 
        This applies to all living species, including humans.
30  Diversity of cheetah -- really distinct pigmentation pattern -- is it a mutant? -- found a mutation that seemed to chnage the pigmentation (three stripes at the back of the cheetah)
    Royal cheetah species or mutation? --> mutation
    In cheetahs we can do skingrafts -- how? why?
31  'American cheetah' (extinct for 20,000 years) 
    99% of species that existed on this plannet is extinct
    rn we are in a mass extinction
    Pronghorn can run upto 95km/h (north America) -- the fastest predator in north America is 60km/h 
        -- so why did Pronghorn get fast so fast (in evolution)
            ... their must have been a really really fast predator in north America that led to the Pronghorn gaining that fast speed so it is assumed that the american cheetah must have
            been a very fast cheetah (no evidence) but clearly it was a fast predator to lead their prey to gain a faster speed
   
    convirgent evolution?! //random mention


***Chapter 1***          BIO1130 -Chapter 1-2019-students-PPTX
1 
2   Definition of Science
    X  SCIENCE: the intellectual and practical activity encompassing the systematic study of the structure and behaviour of the physical and natural world through observation and experiment.
        Biology : the science of how life works. 
        Scientific inquiry : the diverse ways in which scientists study the natural world and propose explanations based on the evidence derived from their work.
        Two approaches: –Description based (ex.  describing nature)
                        –Hypothesis-based (ex.  explaining nature)  
3   The Scientific Method
        1.2.1 Inductive reasoning (linked to a descriptive-based approach): 
            –Making a generalization often based on numerous specific observations.
            –particular --> general.     -- so from one or many observation/s make a generalization
            - although their is a probability that you are right but you may be wrong/inacurate
            - we do it all the time
            - pattern in nature leads to explaination in nature
        1.2.2 Deductive reasoning (linked to a hypothesis-based approach) : 
            –Involves stating a hypothesis and drawing conclusions (after experimentation or observation) from this hypothesis.
            –general --> particular.
4   Lets say you taste an orange and say its sweet and then you make the generalization that all oranges are sweet
5   All Scientific inquiry starts with one or multiple observations
    A few weeks ago in the Ottawa river their were many dead fish floating around and people were worried - why? initial postulated causes: toxic spill, anoxia
6
7   -From a hypothesis, you can make a prediction.
    -Predictions must be testable and give a clear result. 
        –If ... then... statement 
    -Hypothesis can be falsified or not falsified.
    -We can never prove that a hypothesis is the scientific truth.
    -If a hypothesis has survived multiple falsificati
8   The case of dead fishes of Gatineau
    After proper necropsies of fishes from the Lièvre River.
        •Cause of death: Gas bubble disease caused by the outflow of a hydro-electric dam on the Lièvre River.
9   Obs.:This orange is sweet
    Hyp.: All oranges are sweet.
    Pred. : If I taste all kinds of oranges, then they will always be sweet. 
    Tests: Tasting all kinds of oranges.
        –Travel to Madagascar : tasted a very sour orange 
        (Hypothesis is falsified)
10  //The following is the blanks in the flow diagram/chart
    Hypothesis not refuted ---------- Hypothesis refuted
11  Contract between science and knowledge (or the ability to know)
        –Initial skepticism on facts
            •We ask honest questions on facts and hypothesis (tangible/real things) and we always re-test what has been found.
        –Realism
            •The world is older and exists independently from my perception of it (the realm of ideas does not have the priority over the real world)
        –Rationality
            •Logic: demonstrations from a scientist must be the result of coherent steps.
            •Parsimony: methodological principle which states that acceptable theories are hypothetically the most economical in assumptions.
        –Methodological materialism
            •All that is experimentally accessible in the real world is material or has a material origin




CHAPTER 2 (September 16)

... missed a whole bunch right here ...


2.4 From Fixity of species to transformism

2.4.2 Buffon (1707-1788)

2.4.3 Lamarck (1774-1829)
    Uses the environment as a factor of change (environmental determinisim)

    2 principles (affects individuals):
        principle of _________ usage and non-usage
        principle of _________ inheritance of acquired characterisitics

    ___spontaneous generation______ explains the presence of simple organisims

    Gradual mechanisim, adpative and involves innate ability of organisims to become more complex

    Theory not recieved well by his peers because it contradicted the religous views of the creation of life

    Problem with lamarcks theory: ___acquired traits cannot be inherited___

2.4.4 Cuvier (1769 - 1832)

    French scientist interested in mammal fossils
    
    Established the science of palentology
        The older the stratum, the more dissimilar its fossils are to current species
        From one layer to the next, species appear and disappear

    Theory of __correlation of parts__ (organs)

    Cruvier believed in the fixity of species, extinction and catastrophisim (catastrophy on planet that wipes out species)
    Progessive creationism (every time there was a catstrophy god created a better species, up to Humans)

    [ talked about jaw bones, carnivoir and other types. Found it was a seal ]

2.4.5 Hutton (1728 - 1797) and Lyell (1797 - 1875) (geologists)

    Geological changes are the result of a slow, gradual and continuous process
    Principle of ___uniformity__ (uniformitarianism): the laws of nature are not affected by the passage of time

    Lyell is the first to establish geology as a scientific discipline

    "the present is the key to the past"

    EXAMPLE:
        Hoodoo (tent rock): where a rock is on sand and there is vertical erosion. The rock holds the sand beneath it and sits ontop of a pillar or column of sand.



CHAPTER 3 (September 16)
CHARLES DARWIN (1809-1882) and Evolution

(not going to ask us when he was born)

3.1 Charles Darwin: Education and Family   
    Stops his studies in medicine (UEdinburgh) and takes more serious interest in religon (CambridgeU)
        prereq for pastor: bachelor of arts
    Develops interest in nature, taxidermy, insect collecting, botany

    1831 leaves oon beagle ship to do cartography of the coast of south america.
    Darwin was invited as campanion of captain but quickly became the naturalist of the voyage.
    
    2 books that were impactful on Darwins trip:
        william paley "theology, or evidences of the existence and attributes of the deity"
            paley is the father of the ___theology of nature__
                avocates intelligent describing
                
        charles lyell: "principles of geology"
            Darwin left believing in the freat flood and in curviers catastrophism
            When he returned 5 years later, he was in agreement with Lyell and Huttons principle of uniformity

3.2 The Voyage of the beagle

    the very distinct Fauna of __South America__ had a profund effect on Darwin:
        - Why do fauna and flora of Africa, Europe, Australia and South America have few species in common?
        - Why are animals and plants of temperate zones of South America resemble the species living in the tropical zones of South America but no the species in temperate Europe
        - fossils ? slide 6

    Why so much shell variability in tortoises in the Galapagos?
    Why is fauna on Galapagos unique?

    Birds: Why so much morphological variability in one group?
    Birds: Why does each island in most cases have their own species (all same body, different face)
        cactus eater
        insect eater
        send eater

3.3 Evolution and Natural Selection
    In 1837, we find in Darwins notes the first mention that species show resemblance to each other because they share a __common ancestor__ (not a common environment)
        - rejects the fixity (no change) of species and accepts the concept of descent with modificaitons (evolution)
        - very materialisitc view of life in contradiction with the religous dogma of the time
        - rejects Lamarck's evolutionary mechanism (environmental determinism)
        Then he begins the search for an evolutionary mechanism

        All the finches of Galapagos stemmed from the common ancestor of the south american finch.
        Saw this when applied to Darwins tree